---
author:
- '<span>John Daley and Danielle Wood</span>'
bibliography:
- 'bibliography.bib'
- 'bibliography2.bib'
nocite: '[@R-magrittr; @R-tidyr; @R-dplyr; @R-XLConnect; @R-XLConnectJars; @R-devtools; @R-Hmisc; @R-Formula; @R-survival; @R-lattice; @R-survey; @R-foreign; @R-zoo; @R-httr; @R-rsdmx; @R-readr; @R-readxl; @R-xtable; @R-grattan; @R-directlabels; @R-quadprog; @R-scales; @R-ggplot2; @R-gridExtra; @R-devEMF; @R-car; @R-data.table; @R-knitr]'
title: Negative gearing and the capital gains discount
...

Summary {#summary .unnumbered}
=======

Grattan Institute’s *Fiscal Challenges for Australia report*, published
last month, reveals how Commonwealth and state government budgets are
under pressure. The Commonwealth Government has run deficits for six
years, with another four forecast. Reaching surplus in the next five
years depends on higher income tax collections through bracket creep and
optimistic assumptions about economic growth, the terms of trade and
spending restraint.

More active policy measures to achieve budget repair are required. This
paper is part of a series by the Grattan Institute setting out priority
reforms for repairing government revenues. In this paper we focus on two
of the most significant areas of concessional treatment of savings
outside of superannuation – <span>**capital gains tax (CGT)
discounts**</span> and <span>**negative gearing**</span>. These tax
concessions allow investors to use debt financed investment as a means
to defer and reduce their personal income tax liabilities.

These tax concessions create incentives for investors to favour debt
financed and speculative investments, particularly in property. The
growing demand from investors has increased housing prices, to the
disadvantage of young would-be home buyers. Like most tax concessions on
investment, these discounts largely benefit the wealthy.

Although income from capital gains is typically treated more favourably
in most countries, there is good reason not to favour it too much, and
to think Australia’s discount is too large.

The preferential treatment of capital gains for individuals and trusts
was a <span>**\$6.2 billion tax expenditure last year**</span>.
Deductions for rental losses result in over <span>**\$4 billion**</span>
in foregone revenue each year. These tax policies are more than a drain
on the budget: they are unnecessary and their misalignment has created
perverse incentives. Losses can be written off in full while only half
the gains are taxed. Investors have dutifully poured money into assets
which make losses for a long time, in anticipation of later capital
gains.

As a consequence property prices have soared and revenue has leaked,
mostly for the benefit of the wealthier taxpayers.

There is little reason to maintain such a wide gulf between the
treatment of gains and losses. The Commonwealth Government’s primary
goal should be to narrow this gulf.

Reducing the capital gains discount and quarantining losses so they can
only be written off against relevant investment income could raise
around \$4.7 billion a year in the short-term. The preferential
treatment of capital gains should be moderated, even if the policy
surrounding negative gearing is untouched. Negative gearing should also
be limited. Allowing deductions for costs, including interest costs, is
a standard feature of the tax system. It avoids bias against debt
financed investments. But allowing deductions in full each year against
wages while capital gains income is taxed concessionally on sale creates
the opposite bias – encouraging people to pursue debt financed
investments that make sense only because they provide tax breaks on
wages.

But the asymmetric treatment of losses versus gains is the major flaw in
the system. It is a necessary condition of proper reform that both these
elements align. The explosion in both the number of investors running
losses and the size of those losses since the two policies diverged is
strong evidence of tax arbitrage.

Quarantining losses so they can only be written off against other
investment income (operating profits and capital gains) could raise
around \$3 billion a year in the short-term. This would decline to
around \$2 billion over time as those losses are offset against
investment income.

An alternative option would align the tax rates for capital gains and
losses. For example, the capital gains discount could be reduced so that
people paid tax on 70 per cent of their capital gains, but could claim
only 70 per cent of any investment losses against wage and salary
income. Treating capital gains and recurrent losses consistently would
reduce the tax-driven incentive for borrowing to invest. It would
contribute around \$3.3 billion a year to the bottom line.

The best way to transition to the new arrangements would be to phase
them in over a number of years. Such a phase-in will help smooth
reductions in asset prices. Phasing the changes in for all investors
would be preferable to grandfathering which introduces complexity and is
unfair to new investors – particularly younger investors.

Commonwealth budgets under pressure {#commonwealth-budgets-under-pressure .unnumbered}
===================================

In five of the last six years, the Commonwealth Government has posted
headline deficits of more than 2 per cent of GDP. Assuming revenue and
spending projections are correct, Australia is on track for more than a
decade of deficits between 2008 and 2019, with Commonwealth net debt
projected to peak at 18 per cent of GDP in 2017, higher than any year
since the mid-1990s.[^1]

As Grattan Institute’s *Fiscal Challenges for Australia* report
highlights, reaching surplus in the next five years depends on higher
income tax collections through bracket creep and optimistic assumptions
about economic growth, the terms of trade and spending restraint.[^2]

The biggest worry is that budget projections assume that growth will
return to “trend”. The International Monetary Fund recently joined a
growing group of economists who believe that long-run economic growth in
developed countries was trending lower even before the financial crisis,
and future expectations should be lower again.

The government’s fiscal strategy relies heavily on these optimistic
projections. The measures introduced in this year’s budget will make no
net improvement to the budget position in 2018-19. The government
justifies its inaction by saying that the projections suggest it is on a
“clear and credible path back to surplus.”[^3] But projections over the
past five years have consistently overestimated the position of the
budget four years out.

However, hoping for the best is not a budget management strategy: it
simply justifies putting off hard decisions, and shifts the costs and
risks of budget repair onto future generations.

Grattan research shows that each \$40 billion dollar deficit increases
the lifetime tax burden for households headed by a person aged 25 to 34
by \$10,000.

To bring their budgets back to balance, governments will need to
undertake reforms on both the revenue and the spending side. But
recently the Commonwealth Government’s energy has been focussed on cuts
to spending. It has deferred any significant changes in its revenue mix
until after its *Tax White Paper*.

But there are revenue measures that could make a meaningful contribution
to budget repair with little collateral damage. In recent and
forthcoming papers, we articulate four policy proposals – reducing
superannuation tax concessions, changes to capital gains tax and
negative gearing, broadening the GST and the introduction of a
broad-based property levy – that we think governments should adopt to
improve their fiscal position.

The capital gains discount
==========================

Capital gains enjoy preferential tax treatment relative to income from working
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Capital gains are taxed as part of the income of individuals, companies
and superannuation funds. In 2013-14, capital gains tax raised around
\$7.5 billion, around three per cent of total income tax revenue.[^4]

Individuals accrue more capital gains than companies or superannuation
funds. They also generate much more of their gains through real estate
()

![image](figure/Majority_of_taxable_gains_are_earned_by_individuals-1)

<span>A short history of capital gains tax
changes</span><span>box:short~h~istory~C~GT</span> Before 1985 capital
gains were untaxed in Australia. Taxes on capital gains were introduced
to improve the integrity of the tax system, which was undermined by
taxpayers recharacterising regular income as capital to avoid tax.[^5]

Between 1985 and 1999, real capital gains (sale proceeds minus the
original purchase price adjusted for inflation) were taxed at a
taxpayer’s marginal income tax rate.

As recommended by the Ralph Review of Business Taxation, the Howard
Government removed indexation adjustments so that tax was applied on
nominal gains. To offset the removal of the indexation concession,
capital gains tax was discounted by 50 per cent for individuals and
33 per cent for superannuation funds for assets held for more than a
year. Capital gains of small unincorporated businesses, but not large
businesses, are also discounted by 50 per cent. Small businesses also
receive a range of other CGT concessions. When this regime was
introduced, it was argued that it would stimulate capital markets and
make the Australian regime more internationally competitive.[^6]

The tax concession is a crude way to adjust for the effects of
inflation. It results in a lower tax bill compared to taxing real gains
so long as asset values grow at least twice the rate of inflation. Given
the strong real growth in asset prices, particularly residential
property, since the discount was introduced governments have almost
certainly lost revenue from the change.

Before 1985, capital gains were not taxed in Australia. Since then, the
tax treatment of capital gains has varied, but they have always been
taxed at a lower rate than wage and salary income ().

Under the current rules, net capital gains are included as part of
assessable income.[^7] For individuals and small businesses, 50 per cent
of their capital gains are excluded from income if the assets are held
for more than one year. This means the effective tax rate paid on these
gains is half the rate than for other forms of income. For
superannuation funds, a third of the gains are excluded. Large
corporations pay tax on all of their capital gains at the corporate tax
rate of 30 per cent.

Capital gains on owner-occupied housing are not taxed at all.[^8]

Capital gains have other less explicit tax advantages compared to
recurrent income. Investors control when they realise gains.
Consequently, they can reduce their tax by selling assets when their
income is low, such as after retirement, so they are taxed at a lower
marginal rate.[^9] Further, unlike other forms of income, capital gains
are taxed on sale rather than as they accrue. This deferral of tax is
akin to the government providing the investor with an interest free
loan(See )

The 50 per cent capital gains tax discount is too generous {#sec:ShouldCapitalGainsBeTaxedConsistently}
----------------------------------------------------------

[sec:The50pcCGTdiscounttoogenerous] There are good reasons for taxing
capital gains consistently with other forms of income. It would tax all
increases in spending power the same way, reduce revenue leakage from
artificially structured transactions, reduce distortions in investment
choices, and make the tax system more progressive.

On the other hand, taxing capital gains at full marginal rates would tax
the inflation component of gains and may deter people from saving,
investing or selling long held assets.

The challenge for tax policy is to strike the balance between these
costs and risks. The current 50 per cent discount is too generous. When
the other tax benefits for capital gains are taken into account, the
discount over-compensates investors for inflation and provides a
sizeable tax break for the wealthy.

### Taxing capital gains as ordinary income has merit

Capital gains and other forms of savings income increase a person’s
spending power. All increases in spending power should be taxed
consistently regardless of how they are earned (chapter 2); “a buck is a
buck is a buck”, as the Canadian Carter report put it.

Taxing capital gains consistently with ordinary income maintains the
integrity of the tax base. Concessions results in \`\`revenue leakage as
taxpayers find ways to convert income into capital gains.[^10] Sealing
the income tax base is a key reason capital gains are taxed in most OECD
countries[^11] and motivated the introduction of capital gains in
Australia (see )

Traditionally, sheltering income by converting it into capital has been
the preserve of the wealthy. Executives paid via shares or stock
options[^12] or corporate reorganisations of private corporations to
convert dividend income into capital gain, for example.[^13] Yet
borrowing to finance investments with negative income flow but positive
capital gains is another way in which wage income is effectively
converted into capital gain for tax purposes. This conversion comes
about via the interaction of negative gearing with the capital gains tax
provisions (). A storm of easy credit and lower taxes on capital has led
to torrential borrowing in pursuit of tax advantages, and thus even
greater revenue leakage.

Finally, discounted taxation of capital gains favours wealthy taxpayers
who receive most of the capital gains. Almost 80 per cent of capital
gains are earned by those in the top 20 per cent of income earners ().
Compared to low income earners, higher income earners are more likely to
have additional income that can be invested.[^14]

#### Tax gains on an accruals basis?

Taxing capital gains on realization creates several distortionary
effects, which we have mentioned above. Investors are incentived to hold
onto assets that they would otherwise sell because of the looming tax
bill. Investors also enjoy a lengthy deferral of tax, effectively a
tax-free loan from the government to (generally wealthy) asset-holders.
Finally, realization-based CGT regimes allow asset holders to wait until
their marginal tax rate is low (as during retirement) before selling.

These problems can be eliminated by taxing gains on an accruals basis –
that is, by requiring asset holders to pay tax every year the asset is
held on the accrued gain, regardless of whether it is sold or not.
Although taxing on an accrual basis has been recognized as the ideal
capital gains tax regime in theory[^15] it has been neglected
policy-makers due to perceived difficulties in implementation.

Although implementation is always difficult, the claim that taxing on an
accruals basis is impractical is increasingly regarded as weak in the
tax literature.[^16] The issue

These problems can be avoided by switching

The current regime of capital gains taxation has several well-documnted
flaws. Taxes are imposed on realization, which creates economic
distortions through asset lock-in, provides investors with an implicit
interest-free loan towards their tax liabilities, and allows investors
to minimize their tax by waiting till retirement (when their marginal
tax rate is very low) or by avoiding tax altogether.

### Some discount may be justified but 50 per cent is too high

A concession from marginal rates of income tax should only be made if it
serves a policy aim.

Some discount on tax treatment of gains is justified to avoid taxing the
inflation component of gains. But with inflation rates low relative to
investment returns, the 50 per cent discount overcompensates most
investors. This is particularly true when the other tax advantages of
gains – tax deferral and the ability to control the timing of
realisation – are taken into account. Other justifications for
concessional tax treatment of gains – maintaining the incentives to save
and start new business and moderating the effect of “asset lock-in” –
have weak empirical foundations. In any case, lower taxes on capital
gains are not the most targeted way to achieve these objectives.

Most OECD countries offer some type of discount or concession for
capital gains but it varies by investment type.[^17] But the hurdles to
qualify for the most generous concessions can be stringent. Holding
periods to receive maximum concession on investment property are ten
years in Germany and Korea, 20 years in Slovenia, 30 years in France and
35 in Austria.[^18] In New Zealand, where capital gains are notionally
tax free, capital gains on property purchased with the intent to sell is
taxed as ordinary income.[^19]

#### The CGT discount overcompensates for inflation and is not consistent with the treatment of other investment income

A lower tax rate for capital gains is sometimes justified on the basis
that the inflation part of gains should not be taxed. The effective tax
rates on real returns can be high if nominal gains are taxed at marginal
income tax rates.[^20] This is particularly true of investments with low
real returns that are held for an extended period ().

But the tax concession is a crude way to adjust for the effects of
inflation. Investors pay less tax compared to a tax on real gains long
as asset values grow at least twice the rate of inflation. So the
discount overcompensates investors with high returns and
undercompensates those with low ones.

Since the introduction of the capital gains tax discount in 1999, house
prices have grown annually by an average of 7.3 per cent while share
prices have grown by an average of only 3.6 per cent. Inflation over
this period was 2.8 per cent.[^21] So the 50 per cent discount has
overcompensated housing investors. In contrast, share investors, who
have suffered low average capital returns due to the global financial
crisis, would have been better off under a regime that taxed real
capital gains.

But full compensation for inflation is not needed to constrain effective
tax rates on gains at or below an investor’s marginal rate. Capital
gains enjoy other tax advantage that act to lower the effective tax
rates.

First, capital gains are taxed upon realisation
(<span>*i.e. *</span>when the asset is sold) not as they accrue,
providing investors with an implicit interest-free loan on tax
liabilities.[^22] This substantially reduces the effective tax rate paid
on gains, with the tax benefit increasing the longer the asset is held
().[^23]

Investors are also able to choose the time of an asset’s sale to
minimise taxes on capital gains. We see evidence of people waiting to
retirement to realise capital gains (see
below).[sec:InvestorsChooseTimeOfRealization] This reduces the average
tax rate an investor pays on capital gains income. For example, the
average marginal tax rate on capital gains for people in the workforce
is 31 per cent compared to 17 per cent for people over 50 with no wage
income.[^24]

Making additional inflation adjustments for capital gains magnifies the
tax advantages capital gains receive over other investment income.
Australia’s current system provides no explicit inflation adjustment for
interest on bank deposits – assets disproportionately held by the least
well off[^25] – that do not receive these other tax advantages.

The current 50 per cent discount compensates, and in many cases
overcompensates, for the effects of inflation on post-tax returns. When
the other tax advantages for capital gains income are factored in,
capital growth assets receive sizeable tax breaks.

#### Tax concessions for capital gains generate revenue leakage

A lower tax rate for capital gains results in ‘revenue leakage’ as
taxpayers find ways to convert income into capital gains.[^26]

Yet the protection offered by a capital gains tax has been eroded by
negative gearing.

#### Tax concessions distort investment choices

Arguments for lower rates, concessions, or fully abolishing the capital
gains tax often rest on improving investment decisions. But lower taxes
on capital gains may in fact distort some investment choices. Setting
taxes for capital gains lower than operating income creates an incentive
for investors to choose assets more likely to generate income through
capital gains rather than operating income.

#### Tax concessions on gains favour the wealthy

![image](figure/Nearly_eighty_per_cent_of_capital_gains_are_earned_by_those_-1)

Some of this is accounted for by the ‘lumpy’ nature of gains. This means
that realising gains can push investors up the taxable income scale.
When we control for this by removing gains from income, we see that more
than 30 per cent of gains are still earned by those in the top ten per
cent of (non-capital gains) income.

A large fraction of gains are also earned by those would be in the
bottom ten per cent of income earners but for their capital gains income
(). As we show later, much of this is explained by the “retirement
realisation effect” whereby people hold on to their assets until
retirement so they can realise their gains when their taxable income is
low.

The tax concession is a crude way to adjust for the effects of
inflation. In a world with constant tax scales, the 50 per cent discount
results in a lower tax bill compared to taxing real gains so long as
asset values grow at least twice the rate of inflation. As shows, in the
current low inflation environment, the 50 per cent discount
overcompensates most investors.

<span>Returns (% p.a.) in the 10 years to December
2013</span><span>fig:ASX~B~efore~a~nd~a~fter~t~ax~r~eturns~f~or~1~0~y~ears</span>
![image](figure/ASX_Before_and_after_tax_returns_for_10_years-1)

Investors are also able to choose the time of an asset’s sale to
minimise taxes on capital gains. We see evidence of people waiting to
retirement to realise capital gains (see below). This reduces the
average tax rate an investor pays on capital gains income. For example,
the average marginal tax rate on capital gains for people in the
workforce is 30.8% compared to 17.4% for people over 50 with no wage
income.

Making additional inflation adjustments for capital gains magnifies the
tax advantages capital gains receive over other investment income.
Ironically Australia’s current system provides no adjustments for the
least protection to bank deposits – disproportionately held by the least
well off – and much more protection for other investments.[^27]

Unlike other investment income, gains are taxed when an asset is sold,
not when they accrue, which provides investors with an implicit
interest-free loan on tax liabilities (See ).[^28] Investors are also
able to choose the time of the asset’s disposal to minimise tax.

#### Taxing capital gains without a discount will not substantially deter savings and investment

Taxing capital gains at the full marginal rate could deter
entrepreneurship and risk taking by reducing the returns to selling a
successful business.[^29] But this effect is small. Other factors which
drive entrepreneurship and risk-taking behaviour are far more
significant than the tax on any gains ultimately made.[^30] Further,
several separate exceptions already in place limit the effects of
capital gains tax when assets or businesses are sold.[^31] In any case,
gains received from the sale of business are a small proportion of total
gains from individuals: most are from property and share-market
investments ()

While mixed, empirical evidence suggests that aggregate savings may not
be particularly responsive to tax rates, particularly for high income
earners. For example, @Engen1996 finds that tax breaks for saving
influence the choice of savings vehicle but do not increase overall
household savings much. And the OECD finds that tax breaks for saving
are generally ineffective for high income earners because this group are
likely to save anyway.[^32] @chetty2013subsidies show that reduced
subsidies for retirement savings for high income earners lead to almost
no reduction in overall savings efforts.[^33]

This suggests that larger distortions arise from the different tax
treatment of different forms of savings than from the weight of taxes on
capital in general.[^34]

#### People may hold assets longer, but many already wait until retirement

The other economic cost of higher taxes on capital gains is greater
asset lock-in.

Because taxes are only paid when gains are realised, investors are
encouraged to hold on to assets with large accumulated gains.[^35] In
effect, the investor seeks to maintain the implicit interest free loan
on accrued gains. Crystallising a capital gain is only worthwhile if an
investor can achieve a materially higher return ().[^36]

Lock-in can discourage investors from moving their money to the
investments with the highest pre-tax returns, so assets do not always go
to their highest value use.[^37] Lock-in effects are most significant
from a whole of economy perspective, if they constrain financing of
profitable investments.[^38] Australia’s open capital markets and
generous capital gains tax regime for non-residents, reduce the danger
that worthwhile projects will not get access to capital because of
lock-in.[^39]

The more fundamental cause of lock-in is the “retirement realisation
effect” – the tendency for investors to wait until retirement when their
taxable incomes are low before realising gains. @Wood2010a found that
after adjusting for other factors, the probability of a landlord selling
a property increases by over 20 percentage points once they retire.

<span>Capital gains tax and asset lock
in</span><span>box:CGT~a~sset~l~ockin</span> Suppose Hayley, an investor
in the top tax bracket purchases a house for \$700,000 and holds it for
10 years. During that time the market price of the house increases to
\$1 million. She makes a net rental return of 5 per cent a year, giving
her a \$50,000 income stream.

If she were to sell the house she would crystallise the \$300,000 in
gains, paying tax on 50 per cent of the gains at her marginal tax rate
of 49 per cent (\$73,500). This would leave her with around \$926,500
from the sale: \$226,500 in net gains and her initial investment of
\$700,000. The sale will only be worthwhile if Hayley can find an
alternative property that yields more than her current rental income of
\$50,000 with the same opportunity for capital gains. With her \$926,000
sale proceeds she would need to find a property with net rental return
of more than 5.4 per cent a year.

Properties with rental yields below this but higher than her current 5
per cent would not be attractive because realising the tax liability on
her current property erodes her capital base for investment.

The higher the tax rate on capital gains the less willing she will be to
realise gains to pursue new investment opportunities. If capital gains
were taxed in full, rather than with a 50 per cent discount, her hurdle
rate for the new investment would be 5.9 per cent.

We can see the retirement realisation effect in the patterns of capital
gains realisation by age. Those over 50 have much higher average
realisation of gains, regardless of income level. The preponderance of
retirees occurs regardless of income level as clearly shown in the
incidence of capital gains realizations in .

![image](figure/Prob_of_CGevent_by_age_income-1)

And many of those 50 to 64 – the peak retirement years[^40] – realise
sizeable gains when their other taxable income is low, suggesting they
are waiting until retirement. Indeed, almost 60 per cent of the capital
gains in this age group are earned by the 24 per cent of people without
wage and salary income.

The other group that realise a lot of capital gains are high income
older people. Many of these will be people moving assets inside their
Self Managed Super Fund in anticipation of retirement.[^41]

The other important cause of lock-in is the fact that capital gains are
disregarded on death. Passing assets to a beneficiary is not regarded as
an “event” that triggers a capital gains tax liability. So by passing on
assets to heirs, capital gains taxes can de deferred indefinitely.

Ultimately, the best way to reduce asset lock-in is to tax gains on an
accruals basis, with interest charges on the deferred tax.[^42] This
would remove the incentive to hold on to gains to reduce the tax burden.
To date, annual asset revaluations have been considered impractical and
beset with administrative difficulties.[^43] But such valuations can be
done easily for shares and to a lesser extent property (which is already
revalued in most states every one or two years for the purposes of
levying council rates (chapter 5)).[^44] The Henry review flagged that
such an accruals approach to capital gains becomes more feasible as
technology improves.[^45]

Negative gearing reduces tax on investment returns and distorts investment choices  {#sec:negative_gearing_provides}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Negative gearing is the use of losses made on investments (including
mortgage interest payments) to reduce one’s taxable income including
wages.

The ability to offset losses against other income is part of the normal
operation of the Australian tax system, and applies to a wide range of
investments and business activities. If losses were not deductible, they
would be treated asymmetrically to gains (which are taxed) and
investments in risky assets would be less attractive. Deductibility of
interest payments in theory maintains tax neutrality for investors
choosing between lending and equity financing.[^46]

But there is no theoretical basis for allowing losses on investment to
be deducted against entirely unrelated income such as wages. Indeed,
allowing full deductibility of investment losses against wages when
capital gains are taxed concessionally and only on realisation leads
investors to favour debt financed investments that generate more of
their returns via capital gains in order to maximise tax breaks on
wages. This reduces tax collections and has negative impacts in
investment markets, particularly housing markets, where the tax
treatment has encouraged speculative activity.

Most other advanced economies provide a less generous treatment for
rental losses. The Unites States only allows losses to be written off
against other forms of “passive” income.[^47] The UK and many European
countries only allow deductions against the same class of income, so for
example, losses on investment property can only be used to reduce tax on
income or capital gains from other investment properties. Others such as
the Netherlands do not allow deductibility of losses from investment
housing.[^48]

### Interaction with capital gains tax allows investors to defer and reduce their tax

Taxes on capital gains are discounted by 50 per cent and only paid when
the asset is sold. But negative gearing arrangements allow investors to
deduct losses – investment expenses (including interest costs) in excess
of rental income from wage income that would otherwise be taxed at the
full marginal rate.

With the right investment strategy, an investor can use this asymmetry
in the tax treatment of gains and losses to defer and reduce taxes on
their wage income ().

<span>Using negative gearing to reduce taxes on wage
income</span><span>box:Use~N~G~t~o~r~ed~t~ax</span> High income
investors can maximise the tax shelter on their wage income by borrowing
to invest in assets that generate less in recurrent income and more
through capital gains.

Suppose Dan, a lawyer earning \$250,000 a year, borrows \$750,000 to
purchase an investment property. Interest on the loan is 6 per cent a
year and the property generates a rental return of 2.5 per cent each
year. Most of the return is via capital appreciation of 7 per cent each
year.

In the first year, Dan makes a loss of \$26,000 on the property and
reduces the tax he pays on his \$250,000 salary by \$12,000. His rental
losses decline over time as the property appreciates. After five years,
Dan has reduced taxes on his wage income by a total of \$55,000. If he
sells the property after five years he will realise a capital gain of
\$233,000 and pay tax on the gain of just under \$55,000.

Because of the asymmetry of tax treatment of gains and losses, Dan pays
\$294 *less* tax in total over five years than he if he had not
purchased the house. So despite his profit of more than \$115,000 on the
investment, in effect he pays no tax on this profit, in fact he receives
a small tax reduction.

The attractiveness of using investment losses to reduce taxes on wage
income is evident in the age profile of those negatively gearing
property. Investing in loss making properties is popular amongst those
of working age, but far less prevalent amongst over 60s who are unlikely
to benefit from the tax write-offs. Over 70 per cent of those under 60
with investment properties make rental losses compared to less than
35 per cent over 60. (See .)

![image](figure/Age_negative_gearing_investments-1)

The tax advantages are also evident in the greater propensity of those
with negatively geared properties to “churn” their investments.
Properties do not stay negatively geared forever. Rents rise over time
with increases in the value of the housing stock while interest payments
only vary with the interest rate, as the loan value is unchanged.[^49]
So if investors want to stay negatively geared they need to turnover
their investments.

We see evidence of higher property turnover amongst negatively geared
investors. Studying a sample of investors with rental properties,
@Wood2010a showed that 40 per cent of investors with rental properties
retained their properties at the end of a 5 year period. Amongst the
investors that were negatively geared, however, only 20 per cent
retained ownership. And the proportion of landlords that purchased
another property after selling was moderately higher for negatively
geared investors than other investors.

#### These tax advantages are distorting investment choices

The tax advantages conferred by the interaction of negative gearing and
capital gains tax biases the choice of investments. For a given overall
return, an investor will prefer an asset that pays less in the way of
recurrent income and more in the way of capital gain. As @RBA2014
[p. 42] notes:

> …in most countries the earning of rental income is seen as the most
> important reason for investing in rental properties. … This seems to
> stand in contrast to the situation in Australia where properties are
> commonly marketed on the presumption that they do not earn positive
> taxable income for a considerable period.

@seelig2009understanding echoes the RBA view, finding that the majority
of property investors saw capital gains as more important that rental
income in motivating them to invest in property.[^50]

The asymmetry between the tax treatment of gains and losses also makes
debt financing of investment more attractive. For a high income taxpayer
investing in a rental property, real effective marginal tax rates are
substantially lower for a property financed through borrowing. The
higher the gearing, the lower the effective marginal tax rate ().

![image](figure/Effective_tax_rates_depend_on_borrowing-1)

The Henry Tax Review described the asymmetry between gains and losses as
“among the greatest tax-induced biases to the savings choices of
households.”[^51] This runs counter to the rationale for allowing the
deductibility of losses – to maintain tax neutrality of debt and equity
financing.

Indeed, the distortions created are so large that it is possible that
even investments with negative pre-tax returns can provide a positive
profit to investors once the tax benefits are taken into account.[^52]
@seelig2009understanding estimate that around half of investors
indicated that they would not have invested in property if negative
gearing had not been available.

While these distortions exist for all investments, the tax advantages
are greatest for property because bank lending rules allow greater
leverage than for others assets such as shares that also produce capital
gains.[^53]

#### And investors have responded to these incentives

There has been a boom in negatively geared residential property
investments over the last two decades. Other than a temporary dip
following the global financial crisis, the number of taxpayers making
losses on residential property has increased steadily. Average losses
for those negative gearing have grown to more than \$9,000 per year. And
the total losses since the introduction of the CGT discount leave us in
no doubt: investors are happy to disregard rental losses in anticipation
of future gains. (.)

Both have contributed to Australian landlords moving from being
collectively profitable, to accruing billions in net rental losses each
year. This coincided with the introduction of the capital gains tax
discount in 1999. In the year prior to the introduction of the discount,
Australia’s 1.3 million landlords made an aggregate taxable profit of
\$700m. By 2012-13, the two million landlords reported collective losses
of \$5.5 billion ().[^54]

And the average level of gearing for property investors is increasing.
Even though interest rates are falling, interest deductions as a
proportion of rents increased from 45.6 per cent of gross rental
payments in 1997-98 to 61.6 per cent in 2012-13.[^55]

![image](figure/Net_rent_over_time-1)

![image](figure/Negative_gearing_real_over_time-1)

#### Impact on housing markets

Unlimited negative gearing contributes to higher house prices but does
not ease rents.

The favourable tax treatment drives up house prices because it increases
the after-tax returns to housing investors.[^56] This helps existing
home-owners but reduces rates of home ownership among younger age
groups.[^57]

These tax incentives also contribute to volatility in housing markets.
Negative gearing is most attractive as a tax minimisation strategy when
asset prices are rising strongly. So in boom times it further increases
investor demand for housing. The opposite is true when prices are stable
or falling. The Reserve Bank, Productivity Commission, Henry Tax Review
and Murray Inquiry have all suggested that the tax based distortions
contribute to volatility in the housing market.[^58]

<span>Impact of negative gearing on house
prices</span><span>box:Impact~o~f~N~G~o~n~h~ouse~p~rices</span> Limiting
or abolishing negative gearing will reduce the post-tax investment
returns for negatively geared property investors. There will be a
one-off decrease in house prices as investors reduce their willingness
to pay. Of course, house prices may not actually fall if market dynamics
continue to push prices upwards. But prices will be lower than they
would have been in the absence of the tax changes.

The impact on prices depends on investor perceptions of the size of the
lost tax benefit. Average annual rental losses over the last decade were
\$12.8 billion, generating annual tax write-offs worth an average of \$4
billion in today’s dollars. If investor expectations are guided by
history, the present value of tax benefits over the next decade from
negative gearing is around 31 billion.

If negative gearing were entirely abolished, then these expected tax
benefits would be lost entirely. If this were fully capitalised in the
price of property, prices could fall by up to 10.8%. For policies that
limit negative gearing the price impacts would be smaller since some of
the tax benefits are retained. For example, if investment losses are
quarantined so they can’t be written off against wage and salary income,
the present value of tax benefits lost over a decade might be
\$16 billion, with a maximum impact on property prices of 5.6%.

One concern with limiting negative gearing is that downward pressure on
house prices could leave some highly geared investors with negative
equity. But given expected one-off price impacts of less than 10.8% (),
the risk of negative equity from the tax changes is limited. Only around
ten per cent of new property loans go to investors with loan value
ratios in excess of 90 per cent.[^59] And ratios for existing loans are
falling as property prices continue to grow. For the small proportion of
investors that remain highly leveraged, higher interest rates pose a far
greater risk than changes to the tax treatment of rental losses.

#### Limiting negative gearing will not change rents much

But out of all the effects that negative gearing has on housing markets,
its effect on rental prices is by far the most contentious.

Concerns persist that limiting negative gearing will reduce the supply
of rental properties and push up rents. These arguments typically rest
on two pillars: one, that rental prices rose in the 1980s when negative
gearing for property was restricted and two, that investors will abandon
the market without present tax advantages.

The first argument is quite easily refuted. In 1985, the Hawke
Government restricted negative gearing so that rental losses could not
be used to reduce tax payable on other income streams. Two years later,
the policy was abolished out of concern for increasing rental prices.

But these concerns were ill-founded. Rents did rise rapidly in Perth and
rose somewhat in Sydney. Yet inflation-adjusted rents were stable in
Melbourne and actually fell in Adelaide and Brisbane (). In Sydney and
Perth it was population growth and insufficient residential construction
– due to high borrowing rates and competition from the stock market for
funds – not the policy change, that effected the rent rises.[^60] The
policy change was merely a coincidence. As Badcock and Browett remark in
their 1991 post-mortem of the policy,

> While it was clearly in the interests of the real estate industry to
> exaggerate the effects of the tax reforms, the federal government was
> misguided in its acceptance of the pervasiveness of the ‘rent crisis’
> in mid-1987.

Recent rhapsodies by the property lobby show that little has
changed.[^61] The real estate industry is happy to exaggerate the effect
of abolishing negative gearing on rental prices and governments are
unenthusiastic to contradict them.[^62]

![image](figure/Capital_city_rents_direct_abs-1)

Beyond these historical lessons, economic theory predicts that removing
negative gearing should not change rents much. Investors may want to
increase rents to maintain their post-tax returns but the competitive
dynamic in rental markets will limit any material rent increases.

Rents are ultimately a consequence of the marginal renter deciding
whether they are prepared to pay rent and move out of housing they share
with others – often their parents. If rents go up, fewer people move out
of home, and demand falls.

At the same time, negatively geared investors will face competition from
the third of landlords making positive rental profits. Because these
landlords are not negatively gearing, they will be unaffected by the tax
changes. Tenants can try to beat rent rises by threatening to move to
these other properties.

Rents are set by these dynamics of demand and supply, not by the returns
that owners are seeking. In property markets – just like other markets –
returns determine asset prices, not the other way around. Rents do not
increase just to ensure that buyers of assets get their money back. Put
another way, tenants will not pay more for the same just because their
landlord is unable to make the same return. It is much more likely such
tenants would seek accommodation from a positively geared landlord, or
even purchase a house. While some investors may sell their properties if
tax concessions are less generous, this will only reduce house prices,
not rental prices.

Some investors may sell their properties if tax concessions are less
generous. This might reduce house prices, but it will not increase
rents. Every time an investor sells a property to a renter, there is one
less rental property, and one less renter. There is no change to the
balance between supply and demand of rental properties in the short
term. Others may sell to another investor, but one that doesn’t rely on
negative gearing to make the investment profitable. Again there is no
shortage of rental properties.

It is also unlikely that removing negative gearing would affect the
supply of new dwellings much over the medium term. Currently 93 per cent
of all investment property lending is for existing dwellings.[^63] Less
investor demand would put downward pressure on house prices including
the price of new houses.[^64] But the main constraint on new housing is
land release and zoning restrictions – especially in established suburbs
with good access to jobs and transport – rather than the profitability
of developments. [^65]

General tax breaks like negative gearing are a poorly targeted and
inefficient way of supporting the rental market.[^66]

#### Negative gearing benefits middle and high income earners

Like most tax concessions on investment, tax benefits from negative
gearing are biased to the wealthy. The increase in after-tax return as a
result of the current negative gearing/capital gains interaction is
larger for individuals on higher marginal tax rates, all else being
equal.[^67]

The top 10 per cent of taxable income earners receive more than one
third of rental deductions. But taxable incomes are assessed after
rental losses. In other words, people who are negatively gearing have
lower taxable incomes *because* they are negatively gearing. Correcting
for this by assessing income before rental loss deductions shows that
the top ten per cent of income earners receive almost fifty per cent of
the tax benefits of negative gearing.[^68]

<span>fig:Effect~o~f~D~eductions</span>
![image](figure/Effect_of_Deductions-1)

Options for reform
==================

The favourable tax treatment of investments – particularly the
interaction of the negative gearing arrangements with the capital gains
tax discount – have promoted speculative investment in housing while
also costing the budget bottom line.

<span>**Reducing the capital gains tax discount**</span> is the most
direct way to reduce the incentive for inefficient investment activity.
At the same time, <span>**negative gearing should be restricted**</span>
so that losses from investments cannot be deducted against wage and
salary income. The tax treatment of depreciation should also be changed
to remove the preferential tax advantages generated by the asymmetric
treatment of gains and losses.

An alternative would be to pursue the Henry Review proposal to
<span>**align the tax rates for capital gains and losses.**</span> This
was part of a broader proposal in that review to ensure greater
consistency in the tax treatment of various forms of savings.

Reforms to capital gains tax or eligibility for negative gearing should
apply to all types of assets, not just rental properties, so that the
tax system does not encourage investors to favour one type of investment
over another. [^69]

### Reducing the capital gains tax discount

Reducing the capital gains tax discount would make the investment tax
regime more efficient and fair.

There are good arguments to abolish the capital gains tax discount
altogether. It is not obvious why returns from investment should be
taxed less that returns from working. And the differential tax rates
create incentives for people to convert labour into capital income.

But the arguments advanced for maintaining concessional treatment of
gains sound a word of caution. While there is no compelling evidence
that changes in tax rates materially change savings and investment
behaviour, most studies examining these issues look at changes in
behaviour in response to relatively modest changes in tax rates.
Eliminating the capital gains tax discount would at least double the
effective tax rate paid on capital returns. No OECD country taxes
capital gains at full marginal tax rates in all circumstances.[^70]

Reducing the capital gains tax to 30 per cent for individuals and trusts
would maintain some adjustment for the effects of inflation, while
recognising the other tax advantages that capital gains enjoy. The Henry
tax review nominated a 40 per cent discount for capital gains as an
appropriate adjustment for the effects of inflation, given prevailing
levels of inflation and asset returns.

But the additional tax advantages for capital gains – being taxed only
on realisation and at the timing of the investor’s choosing – means that
investors would still be substantially overcompensated at this rate. A
somewhat lower discount in recognition of these tax benefits would be
fairer and distort investment choices less.

Reducing the discount to 30 per cent, could raise around \$1.6 billion.
This estimate relies on a pair of assumptions with opposing effects. The
first is that asset prices and investor behaviour would not change and
the second is that the 2012-13 taxation statistics, being the most
recent, are representative of future years. The first is likely to
result in a higher estimate than could actually be anticipated as a less
favourable tax treatment would discourage investors and lower prices. On
the other hand, the second assumption would underestimate the revenue
gain these revenues should rise over time as capital losses built up
from the GFC pass were yet to pass through the system.[^71] In our
judgement, the opposing effects are likely to be of similar
magnitude.[^72]

### Limiting negative gearing

There is also a strong case for <span>**limiting the tax deductibility
of losses**</span>. Quarantining losses so they cannot be written off
against wage and salary income would limit the current distortions.

While the deductibility of investment expenses including income
expenses, has a strong grounding, there is no reason that these expenses
should be deducted against wage and salary income. Indeed, allowing
these deductions provides significant tax advantages to investors
driving up house prices at the expense of would be home buyers.

Governments already limit the scope for people to reduce their taxable
income through investment losses to qualify for income support payments.
Income tests for Family Tax Benefit Part A and Part B, Child Care
Benefit are based on “adjusted taxable income” which adds back
investment losses.[^73]

There are different degrees of quarantining. The most generous approach
is to allow losses to be written off against all non-wage and salary
income. This would include all forms of investment income, including
interest and rental income. An alternative would be to restrict
deductions to investment income from the same asset class – for example,
property or shares. The most restrictive is to only allow write-off
against the capital gain from the same asset.

The latter is preferred from an economic perspective because it aligns
the timing of tax for gains and losses, minimising the tax driven
preference to favour capital gains over recurrent investment income. But
adopting more stringent rules may encourage switching to investment
vehicles that allow more generous treatment of losses. For example,
investors might hold assets in a company so they can write off losses
against other forms of investment income.

A more generous treatment that simply quarantines losses to all non-wage
and salary income would be less likely to promote switching to companies
or trusts because losses from these vehicles cannot be written off
against wage income.

Quarantining loss deductions in this way would raise additional tax
revenue in the short term, although the estimates are sensitive to
changes in the housing market and the holding periods for assets.
Applying the average marginal tax rate to the average annual rental
losses of \$10.4 billion would yield \$4.2 billion in additional tax
revenue in the short-term.

Over the medium term, rental losses will start to be written off against
income from capital gains. Assuming no change in investor behaviour, the
additional tax revenue net of lower capital gains tax revenue would
revert to around its average level of \$1.5 billion a year.

Applying one of the more restrictive standards for loss write offs –
limiting to the asset or asset class – would raise more over the longer
term because investors will wait longer on average until they can
realise their losses.

These estimates do not take into account behavioural shifts from the
policy change but some behavioural change is likely. Investments that
make income losses are less attractive when the tax benefits are more
restricted. Much of the appeal of negative gearing lies in the scope to
reduce annual taxes on wage income (). Removing the tax incentive for
leveraged investment should result in investors shifting toward income
producing assets and therefore an overall increase in income tax
collections.

#### Limiting negative gearing only to new properties

An alternative to quarantining negative gearing is to only allow losses
to be deducted for new properties. Proponents argue that this will
maintain the incentives for the provision of new housing. Certainly the
policy will increase investor demand for new developments relative to
existing property. But as noted in (), supply restrictions rather than
insufficient demand is the main constraint on new construction activity.

Restricting tax benefits to a subset of investments, such as new
housing, creates additional complexity and distorts investment
choices.[^74] But while an across the board change to the negative
gearing would be preferable, maintaining existing arrangements for new
properties may not be too distorting. The supply of new properties will
always be small relative to the stock of existing properties at any
point in time so the cost to the budget and the economy of special
treatment for new properties should not be large.

Restricting tax benefits to a subset of investments, such as new
housing, creates additional complexity and distorts investment
choices.[^75] But while an across the board change to the negative
gearing would be preferable, maintaining existing arrangements for new
properties may not be too distorting. The supply of new properties will
always be small relative to the stock of existing properties at any
point in time[^76] so the cost to the budget and the economy of special
treatment for new properties should not be large.

#### Symmetrical tax treatment of losses and capital gains

An alternative proposal put forward in the Henry review was to discount
rental losses by the same amount as the capital gains tax discount.[^77]
So, if the capital gains discount was reduced to 30 per cent so that
70 per cent of gains were taxable, investors would also be able to write
off 70 per cent of their losses against their taxable income (including
wage and salary income).

This proposal could also raise an additional \$2 billion each year for
the budget. By restoring the symmetry in the treatment of gains and
losses, investors would have less incentive to ‘chase’ capital gains
rather than recurrent income.[^78]

This was part of a broader proposal in the Henry tax review to align the
tax treatment of different savings vehicles. The review recommended that
bank account interest and positive rental income receive the same
discount as capital gains. Although a detailed consideration is beyond
the scope of this report, the broader Henry proposal would remove some
of the largest tax based distortions in investment choices, most notably
the tax penalty on bank interest (see below).

Transitional arrangements {#sec:transitional_arrangements}
-------------------------

Changes to capital gains tax and negative gearing should be phased-in to
minimise sudden shifts in asset markets that are prone to over-shooting.
Phase-in also provides investors with time to reorganise their affairs
to adjust to the new regime.

Immediate reform to the current capital gains discount or negative
gearing regimes would encourage investors to sell before the new
legislation came into force. This could be moderated by phasing in the
changes over a number of years. For example, under a ten year phase-in,
the capital gains discount could be reduced to 48 per cent in the first
year, and then reduced by two percentage points each year until 70 per
cent of capital gains are taxed.

Similarly, changes to negative gearing could be phased in. For example,
taxpayers might be allowed to claim only 90 per cent of their losses
against wage and salary income in the first year (the remainder
capitalised against any future capital gain), and the ten percentage
points less each year until no losses are claimed against wage and
salary income.

A less preferable alternative would be to grandfather existing
arrangements. Those who purchased assets before capital gains tax reform
was implemented could still claim the capital gains tax discount, even
if they sell the assets several years afterwards. Similarly, those who
purchased assets before negative gearing reform, could continue to claim
all of their losses against their wage and salary income until the asset
was sold.

Grandfathering causes a number of problems: it adds to complexity,
reduces liquidity, and treats investors – particularly younger investors
– unfairly.

Applying different tax treatments to investments depending on when they
were acquired adds to the complexity of the tax system. Because
investors can hold assets for decades, these dual tax arrangements are
long-lived. For example, the decision to grandfather the capital gains
tax free status for assets purchased before 1986 still contributes to
the complexity of our capital gains tax regime, 29 years later.[^79]

Grandfathering arrangements reduce liquidity because investors have
substantial incentives to retain whichever assets they purchased before
the reform was implemented. They will be reluctant to buy and sell
because the after tax returns on the assets bought earlier will be
higher. Such a drag on liquidity is economically inefficient because it
encourages investors to hold assets even when others could extract a
higher return from them. This is a particular concern with negative
gearing where a landlord may continue to hold a property because it
generates ongoing deductible losses, even though an alternative owner
might profitably develop the property. Grandfathering also exacerbates
intergenerational inequality. Those who own assets before the reforms –
more likely those who are older – earn higher after tax returns than
those who start to build wealth later on.[^80]

Grandfathering arrangements are often driven by the principle of
retrospectivity. Concerns arise if a person acts as they would not
otherwise because of a government policy, and then that policy changes
to their detriment. Legitimate expectations, for which government is
responsible, are violated.

But the principle of retrospectivity is not absolute. Governments are
entitled to change tax rates. If a person buys BHP Billiton shares, they
cannot expect that the marginal tax rate then in force will still apply
when they sell. No investor is entitled to a particular after-tax return
in perpetuity.

Grandfathering (rather than a phase-in) may help existing owners less
than they think. Abolishing the capital gains discount or restricting
claims for losses on investments would reduce the after-tax returns for
new purchasers. This would reduce the price they are prepared to pay
existing owners. A phase-in – which treated old and new owners alike –
would have less immediate price impacts.

If grandfathering is nevertheless adopted, complexity in the long-term
might be reduced by a sunset clause. This would provide that the new tax
arrangements would apply to assets bought before the reforms if they
were sold more than (say) fifteen years after the reform. This would
provide existing owners ample time to reorganise, few investment assets
are held for this long, and it would reduce complexity in the long-term.
This may not be required for negative gearing because properties
inevitably become positively geared over time (), providing a natural
sunset to any grandfathering arrangements.

The most powerful argument for grandfathering is political economy:
those who benefit from the current arrangements are likely to be the
most vociferous opponents of reform. It may be better to grandfather
existing arrangements – thereby muting opposition – than to abandon
worthwhile reform altogether.

Nevertheless, given the competing considerations, phase-in would be a
better transition. There would be less complexity, less immediate impact
on prices, and younger investors would be treated more fairly. Concerns
about investor expectations are not particularly strong as the phase-in
proposed would provide them with ample time to reorder their affairs.

![image](figure/income_age_heatmap_costing-1)

    ##  setting  value                       
    ##  version  R version 3.2.1 (2015-06-18)
    ##  system   x86_64, mingw32             
    ##  ui       RTerm                       
    ##  language (EN)                        
    ##  collate  English_Australia.1252      
    ##  tz       Australia/Sydney

<span>rlllll</span> & package & \* & version & date & source\
 1 & acepack & & 1.3-3.3 & 2013-05-03 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
2 & assertthat & & 0.1 & 2013-12-06 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
3 & bitops & & 1.0-6 & 2013-08-17 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
4 & car & \* & 2.0-26 & 2015-08-06 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
5 & chron & & 2.3-47 & 2015-06-24 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
6 & cluster & & 2.0.3 & 2015-07-21 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
7 & colorspace & & 1.2-6 & 2015-03-11 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
8 & curl & & 0.9.2 & 2015-08-08 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
9 & data.table & \* & 1.9.4 & 2014-10-02 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
10 & DBI & & 0.3.1 & 2014-09-24 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
11 & devEMF & \* & 2.0 & 2015-01-29 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
12 & devtools & \* & 1.8.0 & 2015-05-09 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
13 & digest & & 0.6.8 & 2014-12-31 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
14 & directlabels & \* & 2013.6.15 & 2013-07-23 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
15 & dplyr & \* & 0.4.2 & 2015-06-16 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
16 & evaluate & & 0.7.2 & 2015-08-13 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
17 & foreign & \* & 0.8-65 & 2015-07-02 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
18 & formatR & & 1.2 & 2015-04-21 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
19 & Formula & \* & 1.2-1 & 2015-04-07 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
20 & ggplot2 & \* & 1.0.1 & 2015-03-17 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
21 & git2r & & 0.11.0 & 2015-08-12 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
22 & grattan & \* & 0.2 & 2015-08-10 & Github
(HughParsonage/grattan@58696a0)\
23 & gridExtra & \* & 2.0.0 & 2015-07-14 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
24 & gtable & & 0.1.2 & 2012-12-05 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
25 & Hmisc & \* & 3.16-0 & 2015-04-30 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
26 & httr & \* & 1.0.0 & 2015-06-25 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
27 & knitr & \* & 1.10.5 & 2015-05-06 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
28 & lattice & \* & 0.20-33 & 2015-07-14 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
29 & latticeExtra & & 0.6-26 & 2013-08-15 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
30 & lazyeval & & 0.1.10 & 2015-01-02 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
31 & lme4 & & 1.1-9 & 2015-08-20 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
32 & magrittr & \* & 1.5 & 2014-11-22 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
33 & MASS & & 7.3-43 & 2015-07-16 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
34 & Matrix & & 1.2-2 & 2015-07-08 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
35 & MatrixModels & & 0.4-1 & 2015-08-22 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
36 & memoise & & 0.2.1 & 2014-04-22 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
37 & mgcv & & 1.8-7 & 2015-07-23 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
38 & minqa & & 1.2.4 & 2014-10-09 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
39 & munsell & & 0.4.2 & 2013-07-11 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
40 & nlme & & 3.1-122 & 2015-08-19 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
41 & nloptr & & 1.0.4 & 2014-08-04 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
42 & nnet & & 7.3-10 & 2015-06-29 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
43 & pbkrtest & & 0.4-2 & 2014-11-13 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
44 & plyr & & 1.8.3 & 2015-06-12 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
45 & proto & \* & 0.3-10 & 2012-12-22 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
46 & quadprog & \* & 1.5-5 & 2013-04-17 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
47 & quantreg & & 5.18 & 2015-08-16 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
48 & R6 & & 2.1.1 & 2015-08-19 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
49 & RColorBrewer & & 1.1-2 & 2014-12-07 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
50 & Rcpp & & 0.12.0 & 2015-07-25 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
51 & RCurl & & 1.95-4.7 & 2015-06-30 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
52 & readr & \* & 0.1.1.9000 & 2015-07-15 & Github
(hadley/readr@e66376a)\
53 & readxl & \* & 0.1.0.9000 & 2015-07-15 & Github
(hadley/readxl@7c7f66b)\
54 & reshape2 & & 1.4.1 & 2014-12-06 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
55 & rJava & & 0.9-7 & 2015-07-29 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
56 & rpart & & 4.1-10 & 2015-06-29 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
57 & rsdmx & \* & 0.4-7 & 2015-07-14 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
58 & rversions & & 1.0.2 & 2015-07-13 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
59 & scales & \* & 0.3.0 & 2015-08-25 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
60 & SparseM & & 1.7 & 2015-08-15 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
61 & stringi & & 0.5-5 & 2015-06-29 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
62 & stringr & & 1.0.0 & 2015-04-30 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
63 & survey & \* & 3.30-3 & 2014-08-15 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
64 & survival & \* & 2.38-3 & 2015-07-02 & CRAN (R 3.2.2)\
65 & tidyr & \* & 0.2.0 & 2014-12-05 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
66 & XLConnect & \* & 0.2-11 & 2015-03-01 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
67 & XLConnectJars & \* & 0.2-9 & 2014-08-14 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
68 & XML & & 3.98-1.3 & 2015-06-30 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
69 & xml2 & & 0.1.1 & 2015-06-02 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
70 & xtable & \* & 1.7-4 & 2014-09-12 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\
71 & zoo & \* & 1.7-12 & 2015-03-16 & CRAN (R 3.2.1)\

[^1]: Net debt was 18.1% of GDP in 1995-96. See @Treasury2014b [p. 273]

[^2]: [@DaleyWood2015].

[^3]: [@Hockey2015].

[^4]: [@Treasury2014a].

[^5]: [@Evans2005; @Kenny2005].

[^6]: [@BusinessTaxation1999 p. 14, 598].

[^7]: Capital losses can only be offset against capital gains, not
    ordinary income. But if taxpayers are unable to utilise their
    capital losses is a particular year, they are carried forward to
    future years @ATO2014a.

[^8]: This report does not consider making owner-occupied housing liable
    for capital gains tax because of the significant negative social and
    economic consequences discussed in @Daley2013 [pp. 43-45].

[^9]: A common strategy for investors close to retirement is to shift
    capital assets into Self Managed Super Funds, and then sell them
    when they are aged over 60 and not liable for tax.

[^10]: [@Evans2005; @Minas2013].

[^11]: [@OECD2006b].

[^12]: [@Ingles2009 pp. 8-9].

[^13]: [@Minas2013].

[^14]: The top 20 per cent of households by disposable income save on
    average 35 per cent of their disposable income. This compares to
    dissavings of 25 per cent for the lowest income quintile and savings
    rates of less than 10 per cent for the second and third quintiles.

[^15]: [@burman2009taxing].

[^16]: See for example @Ingles2015CGT.

[^17]: In some countries – including Israel, Ireland, Norway, and
    Luxembourg – property investments other than the family home are
    taxed as ordinary income. See @Harding2013 for a summary.

[^18]: [@Harding2013].

[^19]: [@prebble2010tax p. 25].

[^20]: [@Treasury2010].

[^21]: [@ABS2015a].

[^22]: See also: @Fane2004 [p. 2 @Ingles2009 p. 12]

[^23]: [@Treasury2010 p. 65].

[^24]: [@ATO2013i].

[^25]: Bank deposits comprise 20% of the assets of the households in the
    lowest income decile compared with around 5% for top two income
    deciles. @HILDA2015 [Wave 10]

[^26]: [@Evans2005; @Minas2013].

[^27]: Over 90% of those in the bottom decile have deposits, but less
    than 30% have superannuation assets; and less than 20% have equities
    or life insurance.

[^28]: [See also: @Fane2004 p. 2; @Ingles2009 p. 12].

[^29]: If capital gains were taxed on an accrual basis and capital
    losses were fully deductible against all assets, then taxing gains
    in full would be neutral with respect to risk. However, since losses
    are only deductible against gains this increases the risk that
    investors will make a loss they are not able to deduct. It is not
    clear whether deferral of taxes on gains until realisation, itself a
    significant tax advantage (), is itself enough to compensate
    investors for this risk. @Burman2009 [p. 8]; @Commission2004
    [p. 130]

[^30]: [@Burman1999 p. 75].

[^31]: Capital gains tax exemptions are available for the sale of active
    assets by small business up to a lifetime limit of \$500,000
    provided the gains are paid into a complying super fund. There are
    also exemptions for people over 55 that are retiring and selling
    business asset held for more than 15 years. Small business also
    receive rollover relief allowing them to defer all or part of a
    capital gain for two years or longer on the sale of active assets,
    provided they acquire a replacement asset or you incur expenditure
    on making capital improvements to an existing asset. @ATO2014e

[^32]: [@OECD2007].

[^33]: @chetty2013subsidies ) is a particularly compelling study because
    of the strength of the data (41 million observations on savings for
    people from Denmark). But it is also consistent with the thrust of
    the literature on the effect of tax incentives for retirement
    savings. While findings vary across studies, a summary by @Antolin
    suggests tax incentives increase savings mostly by reallocation from
    other savings vehicles.

[^34]: [@Ingles2009 p. 16].

[^35]: [@Burman2009 p. 69].

[^36]: [@Ingles2009 p. 12].

[^37]: [@Lindsey1987].

[^38]: [@OECD2006b; @Johnson2008].

[^39]: Non-resident investors in Australian shares are generally not
    subject to Australia capital gains tax (see: *Income Tax Assessment
    Act 1936, s. 136-25*

[^40]: The average age at retirement from the labour force for people
    aged 45 years and over in 2012-13 was 53.8 years (58.5 years for men
    and 50.0 years for women). @ABS2013

[^41]: 

[^42]: [@Burman2009 pp. 11-14].

[^43]: [@OECD2006a; @Commission2004].

[^44]: [@Burman2009; @Ingles2009 p. 12].

[^45]: [@Treasury2010 p. 64].

[^46]: [@Fane2004].

[^47]: Passive income is defined as income from rental properties or
    businesses in which the taxpayer does not materially participate. It
    is distinct from active income (wage, salary and income from
    business in which the person is actively involved) and portfolio
    income (income from interest, dividends etc). @IRS2015.

[^48]: See @RBA2014 [p. 43], @Commission2004 [p. 86], @ODonnell2005
    [pp. 92-95].

[^49]: This assumes an investor uses an interest only loan. If the
    investor also repays some principal the investment will flip to
    being positively geared even faster.

[^50]: A clear majority considered capital gains as more important than
    rental income over a five and ten year time horizon.

[^51]: [@Treasury2010 p. 69].

[^52]: [@Burman1999 p. 78].

[^53]: [@RBA2015 p. 23].

[^54]: [@Eslake2013; @Treasury2015a].

[^55]: [@Treasury2015a p. 65].

[^56]: For example, @Commission2004 found that these tax settings had
    added to the housing price boom by encouraging investors to reduce
    current income in favour of longer term gains.

[^57]: [@Daley2014 pp. 14-15].

[^58]: [@RBA2014 p. 45; @Commission2004 p. 75 ,131; @Treasury2010
    p. 70,418; @Inquiry2014 p. 278].

[^59]: [@APRA2015].

[^60]: [@badcock1991responsiveness p. 186; @Daley2013 pp. 47-48].

[^61]: See for example *Analysis of Negative Gearing and CGT discount
    for residential property* (2015)

[^62]: [@CormannLateline2015].

[^63]: [@ABS2015].

[^64]: The price transmission will be somewhat muted by the fact that
    the market for new housing, typically at the edge of cities, is
    somewhat detached from the market for established housing typically
    closer to the centre (See: @Kelly2011.)

[^65]: [@Kelly2013; @Kelly2015 pp.84-90].

[^66]: [@HenryReviewPart2Vol1 p. 74].

[^67]: [@Inquiry2014].

[^68]: @RBA2015 analysis of @HILDA2015 also suggests that higher income
    earners are more likely to negatively gear property. It shows that
    the top 20 per cent of income earners are almost ten times more
    likely to have a debt-financed investment property than those in the
    bottom 20 per cent of earners.

[^69]: [@Commission2004 p. 133].

[^70]: OECD note

[^71]: CGT revenues are yet to recover following the GFC. Receipts were
    0.46 per cent of GDP in 2012-13, down from a peak of 1.56 per cent
    of GDP in 2007-08. Even as asset prices have improved, capital
    losses carried forward have limited taxable gains. @Stewart2015;
    @PBO2014.

[^72]: An independent costing by the Parliamentary Budget Office on
    behalf of Sen. Di Natale this year yielded similar forecasts: a 25
    percentage point reduction in the CGT discount resulted in a
    forecast increase in revenue of \$5.7 bn over three years, looking
    at a different sample year and accounting for reductions in asset
    investment due to discouraged investor behaviour (but not changes in
    asset prices). Our analysis suggests a \$1.9 bn (or \$5.7 bn over
    three years) under the same CGT discount change.

[^73]: Department of Human Services

[^74]: [@McKellSwitchingGears p. 28].

[^75]: Complexity may be less of a problem if other government support
    schemes targeting new property investments – first home buyer’s
    grants and stamp duty concessions – mean that some of the more
    tricky definitional issues around “new properties” have been
    addressed.

[^76]: New dwellings add less than 2 per cent to the stock of
    residential dwellings in year. @ACIL2015 [p. 47]

[^77]: [@Treasury2010 pp. 70,72].

[^78]: [@Treasury2010 p. 418].

[^79]: [@Treasury2010 p. 75].

[^80]: [@Daley2014 p. 14].
